<!-- markdownlint-disable MD013-->

# Object oriented design principles

This book focus on design pattern, but each chapter mentions at least 1 object oriented design principle

## Chapter 1

- Identify the aspects of your application that vary and separate them from what stays the same
  - This principle suggests that if you have code that changes with every new requirement.
  - You should pull the `prone-to-change` logic out of the main class and encapsulate it

- Program to an interface, not an implementation
  - Instead of hard-coding behaviors to concrete class, you should assign concrete implementation to a generic variable
  - This allow better runtime polymorphism which means change behaviours dynamically during runtime

```java
Animal dog = new Dog();
// insead of
Dog dog = new Dog();
```

- Favor composition over inheritance
  - In stead of is-a relationship, use has-a relationship
  - Much more flexibility and

## Chapter 2

- Strive for loosely coupled designs between objects that interact
  - Allow objects work with each other without having too much knowledge & depending on each other to perform task
  - Help the application resilient to change

## Chapter 3

- The open-closed principle
  - Object should be open for extension but closed for modification of already established logic
  - Makes the object both resilient to changes and flexible enough take on new responsibilities

## Chapter 4

- Dependency inversion. Depend upon abstractions; do not depend upon a concrete class.
  - No variable should hold a reference to a concrete class. (Use a factory to get around using new).
  - No class should derive from a concrete class. (Derive from an interface or abstract class).
  - No method should override an implemented method of any of its base classes. (If you override an implemented method, the base class wasn't really an abstraction).

## Chapter 7

- The Hollywood principle.
  - We allow low-level components to hook themselves into a system, but the high-level components determine when they are needed and used. With this we reduced dependency on high-level components while still allow for expression and control
  - Don't call me, I'll call you
