<!-- markdownlint-disable MD013-->

# Better living with Patterns

This chapter wants to provide transition guide for developers moving from theoretical problem into the complexities of real-world software designs.

To achieve this make sure to:

- Learn about the definition of a design pattern
- Learn about and utilize pattern catalogs
- Organizing via Classification
- Make sure to have a "zen mind" and be wary of overusing patterns for non suitable problem
- Broaden patterns vocabulary
- Identify anti-patterns

## The definition of a pattern

We've been learning and using lot's of patterns, but never actually learn the definition of 1:

> [!IMPORTANT]
> A Pattern is a solution to a problem in a context

- The **context** is the situation in which the pattern applies. This should be recurring situation
- The **problem** refers to the goal you trying to achieve in this context
- The **solution** is what you're after: general design that anyone can apply which resolves the goal and set of constraints

In order for a solution to become a pattern we need all 3 of them aspect to align. If you're forgetful person, you're gonna leave your keys inside your car a lot, but breaking the windows every time wouldn't be considered a "pattern", but a last ditch solution.

We have a better ways of describing patterns and collecting them together into patterns catalogs. A good catalog will not only provide a good understanding of the pattern but also its relationship with other patterns in the catalog as well as any consequences and gotchas when implementing.

## Pattern catalogs breakdown

A pattern catalog is typically just a structured way to learn about design patterns. For example, the Gang of Four is a popular catalogs consists of 23 design patterns. Each pattern in the GoF catalog:

- Starts with a name
- Has the classification (or category)
- Has the Motivation section. This is where the concrete problem is described in a scenario and how the pattern is gonna solve that problem
- Has the Intent section which describe what the pattern does in a short statement (kind of like a definition)
- Has the Participants section which show the classes and objects and their roles in the pattern
- Has the structure section which provides a diagram illustrating the relationship among the classes that participate in the pattern
- Has the consequences section describe the effects that using this pattern together in the pattern may have: good and bad
- Has the collaborations section which tells us how the participants work together in the pattern
- Has a implementation which provides techniques you need to use when implementing as well ass issues you should watch out for
- Has a sample code section
- Has a known use section that describes examples of this pattern found in real systems
- Has a Related patterns that describes the relationship between this patterns and others in the catalog

## Organizing patterns

Organizing patterns into group helps narrow our searches to a subset of all design patterns and draw out the comparisons between patterns in the same group.

The most well-known scheme of classification used in catalogs is to divide patterns based on their purpose:

| Category   | Core intent                                                                             | Patterns                                                                                                                        |
| ---------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Creational | Object Creation: Decoupling the system from how its objects are created and composed.   | Abstract Factory, Builder, Factory Method, Prototype, Singletontem                                                              |
| Structural | Composition: Using inheritance and interfaces to form larger, more flexible structures. | Adapter, Bridge, Composite, Decorator, Facade, Flyweight, Proxy                                                                 |
| Behavioral | Interaction: Defining how objects communicate and distribute responsibilities.          | Chain of Responsibility, Command, Interpreter, Iterator, Mediator, Memento, Observer, State, Strategy, Template Method, Visitor |

We also have another popular scheme decided by whether or not the patterns deals with classes or object:

| Category | Description                                                                                                                                                                           | Patterns                                                                            |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Class    | Describe how relationships between classes are defined via inheritance. Relationships in class patterns are established at compile time.                                              | Template method, Factory method, Adapter                                            |
| Object   | Describe relationships between objects and are primarily defined by composition. Relationships in object patterns are typically created at runtime and are more dynamic and flexible. | Composite, Iterator, Decorator, Proxy, Strategy, State, Abstract Factory, Singleton |

## Thinking in patterns

There are a few guidelines you can follow:

- KISS
- Design Patterns aren't magic bullets, don't over-apply
- You know you need a pattern when you expect aspects of your system to vary. Identifying areas of changes is usually a good sign that a pattern is needed. Make sure keep it practical changes only, not hypothetical change that may happen
- Refactoring is a good time to start looking into introducing patterns into your codebase
- If you don't need it now then don't do it now.

## Broaden patterns vocabulary

This helps with sharing knowledge and smoothen workflows when dealing with patterns in real-world situation. Some use case of a good shared patterns vocabulary:

- In design meetings
- With other developers
- In architecture documents
- In code comments and naming conventions
- To group interested developers

How?

- Read books
- Apply patterns in real code
- Write documents.

## Identifying anti-patterns

> An Anti-Pattern tells you how to go from a problem to a BAD solution

Not only documenting a good solution is necessary, we also need to document the bad solution. Here is why!

- It tells you why a bad solution is attractive and alerts you to the seductive aspect of the wrong solution
- It tells you why that solution in the long term is bad.
- It suggests other patterns that are applicable which may be a good solution.
